G201 Study Guide #2
Review your text, notes, slides, clicker questions, and in-class activities we did
Definition of a mineral
Any inorganic material that is made up of elements
Any inorganic material that is made up of elements 
Structure of an atom--proton, neutron, electron
Ions--what they are and how they form
Any atom that is has a change in amount of electrons 
What can account for the range of compositions in an element?

Most common elements in crust
Oxygen, Silicon and aluminum. 
Most common type of mineral group--how can you identify these based on chemical formulae?
Silicon, tetrahedrane, single ore double chain. 
Differences between ferromagnesian and non-ferromagnesian silicates
Building block of silicate minerals
How minerals are identified--luster, color, streak, hardness, cleavage/fracture, etc.

Magma vs. lava
Plutonic vs. volcanic/intrusive vs. extrusive
Differences in felsic, intermediate, mafic, ultramafic compositions and how do you recognize these?
Partial melting--what is it? If you partially melt the mantle, what igneous composition do you get and why?
Viscosity--define it, and what are the two main “controls” on it?
Texture--aphanitic, phaneritic, porphyritic: what do these terms mean, and what can you infer about cooling history
Describe how magmas are formed at divergent boundaries and subduction zones
Bowen’s reaction series--know the difference between continuous and discontinuous branches What are the characteristics of shield volcanoes: size, slope, materials that get erupted, viscosity, and igneous composition?
Describe how crystal settling and assimilation can change the original composition of a magma
Know the texture and composition of basalt, granite, diorite, andesite, gabbro, and rhyolite
Recognize dikes, sills, and batholiths and describe what they represent

What are common volcanic gases? Which gas is considered hazardous (Lake Nyos example)
What are the characteristics of shield volcanoes: eruptive style (ie explosive or not) size, slope, materials that get erupted, viscosity, and igneous composition?
What are the characteristics of composite volcanoes: eruptive style, size, slope, materials that get erupted, viscosity, and igneous composition?
Which types of igneous rocks are related to Shield and Composite volcanoes?
Explain plate tectonic settings that are commonly associated with shield and composite volcanoes.
What is a cinder cone?
What composition of magma do lava domes erupt? What hazards do they pose?
What are characteristics of pahoehoe and a’a’ lavas and which type of volcano are they associated with?
What is a fissure eruption? What igneous composition is erupted, and name a local example.
Where are most volcanoes on Earth?
How do geoscientists monitor volcanoes?
What is the VEI and what criteria are used for it?

